# Homework 10

## Problem 1
### (a)
To show that $Pr_B(w) = Pr(w)/Pr(B)$ is a probability function, we have to show that it is always nonnegative and that the sum over all elements $w$ is 1.

Nonnegativity is obvious, since $Pr(\cdot)$ is nonnegative for all inputs.

By definition, $Pr_B(w) = 0$ for all $w \not \in B$. So we need only sum the probibilities of elements in $B$:
$$\sum_{w \in B} \frac{Pr(w)}{Pr(B)} = \frac{1}{Pr(B)}\sum_{w \in B} Pr(w) = \frac{1}{Pr(B)} Pr(B) = 1$$
$$\Box$$

### (b)
Separate $A$ into the disjoint sets $A \cap B$ and $A - A \cap B$ Then
$$Pr_B(A) = Pr_B(A \cap B) + Pr_B(A - A\cap B) = Pr_B(A \cap B) = \frac{Pr(A \cap B)}{Pr(B)}$$
by definition of $Pr_B(\cdot)$.

## Problem 2
### (a)
For the first three parts, see the Venn diagrams in the associated PDF

#### $Pr(A \cup B) \leq Pr(A) + Pr(B)$
This follows directly from Inclusion-Exclusion. Since $Pr(A \cap B) \geq 0$ by definition, removing it from the Inclusion-Exclusion formula leaves $Pr(A \cup B) \leq Pr(A) + Pr(B)$.

#### If $A \subseteq B$, then $Pr(A) \leq Pr(B)$
Since $Pr(B) = Pr(A) + Pr(B-A)$, and $Pr(B-A) > 0$, then $Pr(A) \leq Pr(B)$ follows directly.

### (b)
We have already proven the 2-event Union Bound. Take that as the base case.

Inductive step:

Assume that $Pr(A_1 \cup ... \cup A_{n-1}) \leq \sum_{i=1}^{n-1}Pr(A_i)$. Then
$$P(A_1 \cup ... \cup A_{n-1} \cup A_n) = P((A_1 \cup ... \cup A_{n-1}) \cup A_n)$$
$$\leq Pr(A_1 \cup ... \cup A_{n-1}) + Pr(A_n) \leq \sum_{i=1}^{n-1}Pr(A_i) + Pr(A_n)$$
$$=\sum_{i=1}^{n} Pr(A_i)$$
$$\Box$$

## Problem 3
The possible values from two rolls are:
  * A: 4,8,9,8,12,13,9,13,14
  * B: 2,,6,9,6,10,14,10,14,18
  * C: 6,7,11,7,8,12,11,12,16

### (a)
For $C$ and $B$, $C>B$ 42 times out of 81 possibilities, with two ties. This is 51.9%.

### (b)
$A > C$ 44 times, with 4 ties. This is a victory probability of 54.3%

### (c)
$B > A$ 40 times with 4 ties, for a probability of 50.6%

## Problem 4
This problem is a bit hard to visualize, but the answer becomes clear once you've figured out how to draw the tree correctly. In the accompanying PDF is the tree that demonstrates the following.

There are no wins or losses in the first two ($n = 0,1$) tosses. After that, there is a win and a loss on the branch that started with $H$. For every sub-branch that has a win, there is a win possibility every toss afterward. (Think about it: if $HH$ has already been flipped, we either get $T$ for a win, or $H$---which forms the second $H$ of a new $HH$ sequence and is one flip away from a win again.)

For every sub-branch on which there is the possibility of a loss, the following flip (after not losing) produces nothing, and the flip after that has probability for both a win and a loss.

Every branch on which there is either a win or a loss terminates. On every step, there is a uniques sub-branch on which there has been neither a win or a loss that experiences both a win and a loss.

This explanation doesn't stand on its own. Look at the tree to understand.

The following formulae can be derived, therefore:

For the number of losses possible after $n$ flips:
$$L(n) = L(n-2) + 1$$

For the number of wins possible after $n$ flips:
$$W(n) = W(n-1) + L(n-2) + 1$$

For the total number of possibilities after $n$ flips:
$$T(n) = 2(T(n-1) - L(n-1)-W(n-1))$$

The probability of reaching any particular outcome at step $n$ is $\left(\frac 12\right)^{n+1}$.

Therefore, the probability of winning is
$$\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \left(\frac12\right)^{n+1} W(n) = \frac 23$$

This last part comes from numerical evaluation (which is nicely done using recursive functions, by the way).

Actually, after some thought: the closed form for $L(n)$ is
$$L(n) = \frac 14 ((-1)^n - 1) + \frac n2$$

This just by the standard recurrence solution. Also by standard techniques,
$$W(n) = \frac 18 ((-1)^n - 1) + \frac 14 n^2$$

(The commentary makes the solutions sound straightforward. They follow the textbook recipe, but keeping track of all the terms is hard at midnight, I'll say that much.)

Therefore, doing the summation, we have the probability of winning to be
$$\frac{1}{16}\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\frac{(-1)^n}{2^n} - \frac{1}{16}\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{2^n} + \frac 18 \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{n^2}{2^n}$$

I admit to being too lazy to look up my generating functions to find the closed form for the third term. I used Wolfram Alpha for that. The first and second terms, I got those. These three terms are
$$ \frac{1}{16} \left(\frac 23\right) - \frac{1}{16} (2) + \frac 18 (6)$$

Not surprisingly, this simplifies to
$$\frac 23$$

Not bad.

## Problem 5
### (a)
The sample space here is the set of all five-card hands that can be made from a 52-card deck. An outcome is a single five-card hand. The event that we are interested in is that the hands have five cards of the same suit; four cards of one suit and one card of another; and three cards of one suit and two cards of another. These sets are disjoint (fortunately).

The probability of getting any particular outcome (hand) is one in the number of hands possible, or one in
$${52 \choose 5}$$

### (b)
For a single suit, the number of possible hands is
$${4 \choose 1} {13 \choose 5}$$

For a four-card suit and a one-card suit, it is
$${4 \choose 1} {13 \choose 4} {3 \choose 1} {13\choose 1}$$

For three-card suit and a two-card suit:
$${4 \choose 1} {13 \choose 3} {3 \choose 1} {13 \choose 2}$$

Add these up, and this is the number of hands that meet the criteria. Multiply by the probability of getting any one hand (equivalently, divide by the number of possible hands) and get 14.79%.

## Problem 6
### (a)
Before any cards are turned up, the probability of a card coming up black is
$$26/52 = \frac 12$$
You have a one-half chance of winning.

### (b)
If the first card comes up red, and you choose the second card, there are now 26 reds and 25 blacks in the deck, and the probability of winning is
$$26/51 = 50.98\%$$

### ( c )
With $r$ red cards and $b$ black cards, the total number of cards left is $r + b$. The probability of coming up black is therefore
$$\frac{b}{r+b}$$

### (d)
We're going to do this proof exhaustively, since there's a finite sample space and I'm not sure how else to do it.

The only way to achieve a greater than 50% chance of winning at this game is to make your selection when there is a greater than 50% probability of a black card coming up---in other words, after more red cards than black have already come up in the sequence, so that the majority of the cards remaining are black. But what are the chances that such a scenario will arise?

Let's bound the problem. Consider that the selection will be made on turn $n+1$ (so that $n$ cards have already been turned up before the choice). The probability that exactly $k$ of those cards will be red is
$$\frac{{n \choose k}}{2^n}$$
and the probability that black will be drawn on the next flip is
$$\frac{26-(n-k)}{52-n}$$
The probability of flipping black after $k$ red cards and $n-k$ black cards being drawn is
$$\frac{{n \choose k}}{2^n} \frac{26-(n-k)}{52-n}$$
And the total probability of flipping black on the $n+1$ flip, regardless of the preceding sequence, is the sum of all the individual probabilities.
$$\sum_{k=0}^{n}\frac{{n \choose k}}{2^n} \frac{26-(n-k)}{52-n} = \frac 12$$
This last fact I discovered purely numerically. Though it makes obvious intuitive sense.

One seemingly better strategy is to wait until more red cards have been turned up than black cards, so that there are more black cards remaining in the deck than red cards.

The probability of turning up a black on step $n+1$ after first having had more than half of those already turned up ($>n/2$) red is
$$\sum_{k=\lceil n/2 \rceil}^{n}\frac{{n \choose k}}{2^n} \frac{26-(n-k)}{52-n} \leq \frac 12$$
by definition.

If one forms a strategy of, say, choosing after exactly one more red has been turned up than black, then, for example, the probability of winning on the first round is
$$\frac 12 \frac{26}{51} = 0.2549$$

One must follow the tree down and count up the probabilities of reaching all the leaves, followed by the probability of drawing black at those leaves. The number of leaves at any step $n$ that satisfy exactly $(n+1)/2$ reds having been drawn is
$$L(n) = {n-2 \choose (n-3)/2} - \sum_{p=1, by 2}^{n} L(p){n-p-2 \choose (n-p-4)/2}$$
for $n-p-4 \geq 0$. This recurrence relation is necessary to subtract out those scenarios where the criterion is met at step $n$, but it was already met at some earlier step $p$ and so the case is illegitimate.

The probability of reaching any step $n$ is $1/2^n$; the probability of drawing a black is $\frac 12 \frac{53-n}{52-n}$. Multiply these by the number $L(n)$ and then sum up over all possible $n$ from 1 to 51 (odd numbers only; it can be easily seen that even numbers $n$ can't contribute) and we get 45.68% of ever drawing a black using this strategy. It would be better to just choose the first card for a 50% chance. There is, however, an 88.99% chance of getting a sequence with one more red than black card at some point; but that doesn't matter. These numbers all come from numerical evaluation over the entire spectrum of 52 cards.

It's not exactly a proof to say that getting two more red cards than black cards is a large factor less likely than getting just one more; and the relative boost in probability for drawing a black card in this case is quite small. Therefore, there is a worse chance of getting to black if the policy is to wait for more than one extra red card to show up in the sequence. The probabilities just get worse the larger the number of red cards is made in the policy. Therefore the one-card policy is the best, and it gives only 45%. So then, the best policy is to just pick the first card, at 50%.

Unless I get a flash of insight about a better way to do this, here ends my "proof" that there is no strategy for getting a better than 1/2 probability of winning at this game.

Some scratch work leading to these conclusions is included in the PDF, but is not labeled well. YMMV.
