# Homework 11
## Problem 1
### (a)
There are two children in the household; if they are both girls (event $T$), then the only way to arrange them is $(G,G,Y), (G,G,E)$. If a girl opened the door (event $O$), then this can be due to the arrangements $(G,G,E),(G,G,Y),(G,B,E),(B,G,Y)$.

Including the possibility of boys, there are $2^3 = 8$ different equiprobable ways of arranging these sets.

### (b)
The intersection $(T \cap O) = \{(G,G,E),(G,G,Y)\}$. So
$$P(T|O) = \frac{P(T \cap O)}{P(O)} = \frac{1/4}{1/2} = \frac 12$$

This can also be seen because $T$ represents $\frac 12$ of the possibilities in $O$.

### ( c )
The problem with the argument that concludes that there is instead a $\frac 13$ chance of $T$ is that it is answering a different question.

The question of the probability of $T$ given that the household has one girl is indeed $\frac 13$. But to say that this equals $P(T|O)$ neglects the fact that there are instances of one girl in a household where the girl does *not* open the door. The girl opens the door in only $4/6$ of the instances where there is at least one girl in the household. Therefore the sample space is smaller in the computation of $P(T|O)$, leading to the larger probability.

## Problem 2
### (a)
There are 9 possibilities for the sets $(opp,revolver)$. I will list them and their probabilities rather than drawing the tree:
  1. (P,P): $4/48$
  2. (P,G): $3/48$
  3. (P,S): $1/48$
  4. (G,P): $8/48$
  5. (G,G): $6/48$
  6. (G,S): $2/48$
  7. (S,P): $12/48$
  8. (S,G): $9/48$
  9. (S,S): $3/48$

### (b)
The probability that Mustard is shot $P(M) = (4 + 6 + 3)/48 = 13/48$

### ( c )
The probability that $S$ does not have the revolver $P(\neg S_R) = 42/48$. Also, $P(\neg S_R \wedge M) = 10/48$. So,
$$P(M|\neg S_R) = \frac{P(\neg S_R \wedge M)}{P(\neg S_R)} = \frac{10/48}{42/48} = \frac{10}{42} = \frac{5}{21}$$

### (d)
$P(G_o) = 16/48$. Also, $P(G_o \wedge M) = 6/48$. So,
$$P(G_o | M) = \frac{6/48}{13/48} = \frac{6}{13}$$

## Problem 3
### (a)
It is still the case, in this problem, that the number of ways that $m$ chosen people can have different birthdays is
$$\frac{N!}{(N-m)!}$$
The difference in this problem is that there are now $k-m$ other students who share none of the already-selected birthdays; therefore, their birthdays are arranged in
$$(N-m)^{k-m}$$
different ways.
The probability function is uniform, so that each arrangement has a probability of $N^k$. So all told, the probability of all $m$ selected students having different birthdays from each other *and* different from the rest of the class is
$$\frac{1}{N^k} \frac{N!}{(N-m)!}(N-m)^{k-m}$$
A little rearranging puts this in the form
$$\frac{(N-m)^{k-m}}{N^{k-m}} \frac{N!}{(N-m)! N^m} \approx \left(\frac{N-m}{N}\right)^{k-m} e^{-\frac{m^2}{2N}}$$
where the approximation was previously worked out. For the remaining term, it is
$$\left(\frac{N-m}{N}\right)^{k-m} \approx e^{(k-m)(-\frac mN)}$$
by the law $\ln(1-x) \approx -x$.
The total probability is now
$$e^{-\frac{m^2}{2N} -\frac{2km}{2N} + \frac{2m^2}{2N}} = e^{\frac{m(m-2k)}{2N}}$$
as requested.

Playing with the numbers...with $k=100$, there is already a 95% chance of a match by the time that $m=5$.

### (b)
To get the half-chance of match, simply set the expression above equal to $1/2$. So we get
$$-\ln2 = \frac{m(m-2k)}{2N} \Rightarrow m^2 -2km + 2 N \ln 2 = 0$$
Solving, we get
$$m = k \pm \frac 12 \sqrt{4k^2 - 8N\ln 2} = k \pm k\sqrt{1-\frac{2N\ln2}{k^2}}$$
$$m_{1/2}\approx \frac{N \ln 2}{k}$$
Here we chose the "$-$" option, because the "$+$" option would lead to $m > k$, which is wrong by the construction of the problem. $\Box$


## Problem 4
### (a)
Envisioning the tree, the path from root to $W = TH$ has probability $p(1-p)$; that from root to $L = HT$ has the same probability. The paths to tie $HH$ and $TT$ have probability $p^2$ and $(1-p)^2$ respectively.

The tree terminates at $W$ and $L$ leaves; it continues another round on $T$ leaves. Each round has the same set of probabilities. Therefore, since $P(W) = P(L)$ on the first round, and on every subsequent round, the total probabilities for any number of rounds are the same.

### (b)
On Round 1, the tie probabilities are $p^2$ and $(1-p)^2$. Round 2 has subtrees that branch off of each of the tie leaves of Round 1; the probabilities here are $p^4$, $p^2(1-p)^2$, $p^2(1-p)^2$, and $(1-p)^4$. And so on; for each leaf of tie in Round N-1, Round N has two tie leaves with probability $P(T_{N-1}) p^2$ and $P(T_{N-1}) (1-p)^2$. Every probability term is of the form $p^{2m}(1-p)^{2(N-m)}$. As $N \rightarrow \infty$, all of these terms go to zero exponentially. The number of terms increases linearly, so the total probability of tie goes to zero.

## Problem 5
### (a)
$A$ and $B$ are disjoint events. Therefore $P(A|B) = P(B|A) = 0$ for all elements in $A$ and $B$. These are clearly not independent.

### (b)
$A$ and $B$ are independent.
$$P(A|\bar{B}) = \frac{P(A \cap \bar{B})}{P(\bar{B})}= \frac{P(A) - P(A \cap B)}{P(\bar{B})}$$
$$=\frac{P(A) - P(A)P(B)}{1-P(B)} = P(A)$$

Similarly for $P(\bar{B}|A)$. $A$ and $\bar{B}$ are therefore also independent.

### ( c )
Envision this Venn diagram:
  * $\Omega$ is a rectangle, $4 \times 2$.
  * $A$ is a square covering half of $\Omega$, $2 \times 2$
  * $B$ is a rectangle covering half of $A$, $2 \times 1$
  * $C$ is a rectangle covering the other half of $A$, $2 \times 1$

Now $P(A) = 1/2 = P(A|B) = P(A | C)$. But $P(A|B \cup C) = 1 \not = P(A)$.

### (d)
This follows directly. By definition, and using the given assumptions:
$$P(A \cup B | C) = P(A|C) + P(B|C) - P(A \cap B | C)$$
$$= P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B) = P(A \cup B)$$

## Problem 6
### (a)
By multiplying the probabilities, the prosecutor has assumed that the incidence of these three markers are independent of one another.

### (b)
If pairwise independent, the probability is bound at the top by
$$\frac{1}{3000 \cdot 5000}$$
Still slim odds...but not nearly so bad for our plumber.

### ( c )
If there is no independence among the markers, then the probability is bound on the upper side by $1/5000$.

### (d)
By the product rule, we have
$$P(A \cap B \cap C) = P(A) P(B|A) P(C | A\cap B)$$

While we know $P(A)$, $P(B|A)$, we don't know $P(C | A \cap B) \not = P(C|A)$. Independence of $C$ and $B$ is not enough to assert that equality, and the MIT researcher didn't gather that data.
