# Homework 12
## Problem 1
### (a)
For money invested in a single stock, the value $V$ will be either $2N$ with probability $\frac 12$ or $0$ with probability $\frac 12$. So $E[V] = N$. Risk, but not really any reward.

The variance is $E[V^2]-E[V]^2 = 2N^2 - N^2 = N^2$. Lots of risk, but not much reward expected.

### (b)
For investing in $N$ stocks, $V = \sum_{i=1}^N V_i$, where $V_i$ is either 2 or 0 with equal probability. So, $E[V] = \sum E[V_i] = 2(\frac N2) = N$.

The variance in this case is
$$E[V]^2 - E[V]^2 = \sum^N E[V_i^2] + \sum_{i\not= j} E[V_i V_j] - N^2$$
$$ = (4)(\frac 12) N + (N^2-N)(\frac 14)(4) - N^2$$
$$ = 2N - N + N^2 - N^2 = N$$

Much better deal.

### ( c )
Best to diversify your mom's assets, as in part (b).

### (d)
In the dice problem, the expected payoff is $\frac 16 \sum_1^6 i = \frac{21}{6}$. The variance is $\frac{91}{6}- \frac{21^2}{36} = 2.75$.

### (e)
If the payoff is the die outcome cubed, then the expected payoff is $\frac{441}{6}$. The variance is $\frac{67171}{6} - \frac{441^2}{36} \approx 5792.92.$

## Problem 2
### (a)
The probability that any given one of the stated propositions are true is $\frac 12 + \frac 14 + \frac 18 = \frac 78$. The expected number of true propositions is therefore (by linearity of expectation) $7(\frac 78) = 49/8$.

### (b)
An easy and obvious assignment that makes all the statements true is to assign `True` to every variable. Since no statement consists of all $\neg x_i$, this ensures that at least one variable is true in every statement.

The expected value is $> 6$. This implies that if *any* assignment to the variables creates fewer than 7 true statements, then another assignment *must* make all 7 true. Otherwise, the expected value could not lie between 6 and 7.

## Problem 3
### (a)
$$E[B] = 3(\frac 43) = 4$$

### (b)
This expected value can be found by the definition of expectation. The probability of $0$ delay is $\frac 16$; of $1$ delay is $\frac 56 \frac 16$; of $k$ delay is $\left( \frac 56\right)^k \frac 16$; so the expected value is
$$E[R] = \frac 16 \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}i \left( \frac 56 \right)^i$$
$$= \frac 16 \frac{(5/6)}{(1-5/6)^2} = 5$$
by an already-derived summation formula.

### ( c )
I can't think of any way to do this other than enumerate all the possibilities for the product of the dice throws...all 36 of them. So...the throw values can be
$$\left\{ 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,12,15,16,18,20,24,25,30,36 \right\}$$

with probabilities
$$\left\{ 1,2,2,3,2,4,2,1,2,4,2,1,2,2,2,1,2,1\right\}/36$$

The expected value is therefore $12.25$. Laundry doesn't get done for quite some time.

### (d)
The expected value given the probabilities for the type of student just treats the expected number of days from the previous parts as random variables themselves. So the expectation for $D$ is
$$E[D] = \frac 12 E[B] + \frac 13 E[R] + \frac 16 E[U] = 5.708$$

## Problem 4
For this problem, we'll use Chebyshev's formula.
$$P(|R - E[R]| \geq x) \leq \frac{Var[R]}{x^2}$$

There is an equal probability of choosing either coin 1 or 2. If we let $R$ be the number of Heads, then $E[R_1] = 3n/4$, and $E[R_2] = n/2$. These random variables are governed by the binomial distribution, for which $Var[R_1] = 3n/16$ and $Var[R_2] = n/4$.

We should choose $n$ large enough so that the distance between the expected values is large enough so that with 95% probability the one coin will not produce an outcome close to the expectation of the other coin, and vice versa. In other words, applying Chebyshev to both coins (and noting with subscripts), the distance $d$ between the expected values should be
$$d > x_1 + x_2 = \sqrt{\frac{Var[R_1]}{0.05}} + \sqrt{\frac{Var[R_2]}{0.05}}$$
Substituting,
$$n/4 > \sqrt{5n} + \sqrt{3.75n}$$

Solving by iteration, we find that $n > 279$ should suffice. That's a lot. If we used the less-strict criterion that $d > x_{max}$, where $x_{max}$ is the larger of the two $x$ values, we would find that $n > 80$ would do.

## Problem 5
### (a)
$E[TA]$ is broken down into three parts:
  * $E[Q_{TF}] = 2(3/4) + 0(1/4) = 1.5$
  * $E[Q_{15}] = 3 + E[D_1 + D_2] = 3 + 3.5 + 3.5 = 10$
  * $E[Q_{20}] = \frac 12 (12) + \frac 12 (18) = 15$

$$E[TA] = 10 E[Q_{TF}] + 4E[Q_{15}] + E[Q_{20}] = 15 + 40 + 15 = 70$$

### (b)
$E[LEC]$ is broken down into two parts:
  * $E[GI] = 0.4(40) + 0.3(50) + 0.3(60) = 49$
  * $E[D_1D_2] = 12.25$ from Problem 3c.

$$E[LEC] = E[GI] + E[D_1D_2] = 61.25$$

### ( c )
$$E[SCORE] = \frac 17 E[RAD] + \frac 47 E[TA] + \frac 27 E[LEC]$$
$$ = \frac 17 (84) + \frac 47 (70) + \frac 27 (61.25) = 69.5$$

All of this is possible thanks to linearity of expectation.

## Problem 6
### (a)
Defining $X_i$ as the indicator variable for the $i$th box to be empty, we have $P_1(X_i = 1) = (1/n)$ and $P_1(X_i = 0) = (n-1)/n$ for 1 ball throw. for $n$ ball throws, $P_n(X_i = 0) = (1-1/n)^n$. These variables are by no means independent.

### (b)
The expected number of full boxes is $E[\sum X_i] = \sum E[X_i] = \sum P_n(X_i = 0)$. This is $n(1-1/n)^n \sim n(1/e)$ as $n \rightarrow \infty$. The expected number of empty boxes is therefore $n - n(1/e) = n(1-1/e)$ and the desired constant is $c = 1-1/e$.

### ( c )
Getting $k$ balls in the 1st box is made possible by choosing $k$ of the $n$ balls to place there, and multiplying by the probability that this happens. So,
$$P(k-in-1st) = {n \choose k} \frac{1}{n^k}$$
The probability that anything more will be in the 1st box must be smaller than this:
$$P(\geq k-in-1st) \leq {n \choose k} \frac{1}{n^k}$$

### (d)
I don't know how to do this. I'll come back to it later if I can think it through.

### (e)
Assuming part (d), we have
$$\frac{n}{\Gamma(n^{\epsilon})} \sim \frac{n}{(n^{\epsilon})^{n^{\epsilon}}} \sim \frac{x^{1/\epsilon}}{x^{x}} \rightarrow 0$$
as $x \rightarrow \infty$. The transition there is via Stirling's formula.


## Notes
I wish solutions were available. In particular, I'd be anxious to know how well I matched the "official" solution to Problem 4, and I'd like to know what the deal is with 6(d).

On problem 4, I might have gotten a better bound using Chernoff rather than Chebyshev. I'm wary of both methods, in fact, because this homework was supposedly due before the class even covered those methods. So...
